@chapter Copying

This document was written while AWB was a visiting scholar at
the Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.  This
document is copyright Alan W Black and Kevin A. Lenzo 1998
with all rights reserved but may be freely used for any purpose,
with some minor restrictions.  This document and the scripts
distributed with it is distributed under the following conditions
@example
                    Alan W Black and Kevin A. Lenzo                       
                      Copyright (c) 1998-1999                            
                        All Rights Reserved.                           
                                                                       
  Permission to use, copy, modify,  and licence this software and its  
  documentation for any purpose, is hereby granted without fee,        
  subject to the following conditions:                                 
   1. The code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of    
      conditions and the following disclaimer.                         
   2. Any modifications must be clearly marked as such.                
   3. Original authors' names are not deleted.                         
                                                                       
  THE AUTHORS OF THIS WORK DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO      
  THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY   
  AND FITNESS, IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY         
  SPECIAL, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES            
  WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN   
  AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION,          
  ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF       
  THIS SOFTWARE.                                                       
@end example

The authors of this document, Carnegie Mellon University and the
University of Edinburgh make no further claim on any voices built using
the information in this document.  Voices built using the information in
this document are the responsibility of the builders.  Any restrictions
on the distribution, rights and ownership of the voices are a direct
consequence of the actual resources that go in them.  Of course if you
re-use any part of an existing Festival voice your voice will inherit
any of those restrictions.  However this only applies if you actually
include some code, using existing voices for training or testing does
not restrict the new voice.

Note this document does not remove any restrictions in
the use of Festival or the Edinburgh Speech Tools Library and any
voice generated although (if the rights permit) can be used
commercially will still require the users of the commercial
voice to have the appropriate rights for Festival itself.

@section Acknowledgements

@cindex acknowledgements
@cindex thanks
The following people and organizations deserve acknowledgement for
help making this document exist.
@table @emph
@item Raj Reddy
for inviting AWB to CMU to allow him to work with KAL
@item CMU
for funding the visit
@item OGI and Fonix
for hosting a workshop in June 98 to build a German voice in Festival
which showed the need for a document such as this.
@item Maria Walters, Borja Etxebarria, Mike Macon, Argyris Biris, Stephen Robert Norris, Karin Mueller, Bettina Saeuberlich, Horst Meyer, Gregor Moehler, Mark Breitenbuech, Dominika Oliver, Tae-Yeoub Jang and Weonhee Yun
Who persevered in building voices in Festival without this document,
asking questions and finding problems that made it easier to decide
what should be included here.
@end table



