\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename festvox.info
@settitle Building Voices in the Festival Speech Synthesis System
@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c This document was modelled on the numerous examples of texinfo
@c documentation available with GNU software, primarily the hello
@c world example, but many others too.  I happily acknowledge their
@c aid in producing this document -- awb

@set EDITION 1.0
@set VERSION 1.3.1
@set UPDATED 24th January 1999

@ifinfo
This file documents the processes and issues in building
new voices in the @code{Festival} Speech Synthesis System a general
text to speech system.

Copyright (C) 1998-1999, Alan W Black and Kevin A. Lenzo.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX, or otherwise and
print the results, provided the printed document carries copying
permission notice identical to this one except for the removal of this
paragraph (this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the authors.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Building Voices in 
@title the Festival Speech Synthesis System
@subtitle Processes and issues in building speech synthesis voices
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for Festival Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by Alan W Black and Kevin A. Lenzo
@author Carnegie Mellon University

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1998-1999 Alan W Black and Kevin A. Lenzo, all rights
reserved.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the authors
@end titlepage

@node Top, , , (dir)

@ifinfo
This file documents the @emph{Festival Speech Synthesis System}
@value{VERSION}.  This document contains many gaps and is still in the
process of being written.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Abstract::            initial comments
* Copying::             Copying, use and acknowledgements
* Introduction::        Goals and outline of document
General concepts
* Utterances::
Building waveform synthesizers
* Diphone databases::   Diphone schema, recording and labelling
* Unit selection databases:: General unit selection models (clunits)
Building speaker specific prosodic models
* Building prosodic models::
* Lexicons::            Lexicons, letter to sound rules and post-lexical rules
* Text analysis::       Homographs, token to word rules
* Full example::        
* Evaluation::          Does it actually work and making it better
* Resources::           Getting more help, tools, data etc
* References::
* Index::               
@end menu

@node Abstract, Copying, , Top
@chapter Abstract

This document provides documentation for the processes and
issues in building a new voice in the Festival Speech
Synthesis System.  This covers the necessary stages in building
a voice either in an already supported language or in a completely
new language.

Although the task of building very high quality generalized text to
speech voices is still a difficult task with many open research
questions, we believe the building of reasonable quality voices,
acceptable for many tasks, can be done with the information provided
within this document.  Already Festival has been used to implement a
number of different languages and voices, including: English (US and
UK), Spanish (Castillean and Mexican), German, Polish, Greek, Welsh
Gaelic and Basque.  These voices were often built in very short times (a
few weeks) by people with only minimal knowledge of speech synthesis
(e.g. Master's students).  Although the quality varies, the results all
produce text to speech synthesizers of a quality capable of reading
text, like online newspapers, at a level that native speakers can easily
follow.

Note this document is not a manual for the Festival Speech
Synthesis System itself and assumes that the user has access
to the Festival system and the Edinburgh Speech Tools.  Except 
where explicitly mentioned constructing voices can be done using
these tools alone.

The latest details and a full software distribution of the Festival Speech
Synthesis System, and related documents and resources (including this
document) are available through its home page which may be found
at @url{http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/festival.html}

@node Copying, Introduction, Abstract, Top
@include copy.texi

@node Introduction, Utterances, Copying, Top
@include intro.texi

@node Utterances, Diphone databases, Introduction, Top
@include utt.texi

@node Diphone databases, Unit selection databases, Utterances, Top
@include diphone.texi

@node Unit selection databases, Building prosodic models, Diphone databases, Top
@include unitsel.texi

@node Building prosodic models, Lexicons , Unit selection databases, Top
@include prosody.texi

@node Lexicons, Text analysis, Building prosodic models, Top
@include lexicons.texi

@node Text analysis, Full example , Lexicons, Top
@include text.texi

@node Full example, Evaluation, Text analysis, Top
@include exam.texi

@node Evaluation, Resources, Full example, Top
@include eval.texi

@node Resources, References, Evaluation, Top
@include resources.texi

@node References, Index, Resources, Top
@include refs.texi

@node Index, , References, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@contents

@bye
