@chapter References

@table @emph

@item allen87
J. Allen, S. Hunnicut, and D. Klatt.
@emph{Text-to-speech: The @r{MIT}alk system}.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK., 1987.

@item anderson84
M. Anderson, J. Pierrehumbert, and M. Liberman.
Synthesis by rule of @r{E}nglish intonation patterns.
In @emph{Proceedings of ICASSP 84}, pages 2.8.1--2.8.4, 1984.

@item bachenko90
J. Bachenko and E. Fitzpatrick.
A computational grammar of discourse-neutral prosodic phrasing in
  @r{E}nglish.
@emph{Computational Linguistics}, 16(3):155--170, 1990.

@item bellegarda98
J. Bellegarda and K. Silverman.
Improved duration modeling of english phonemes using a root
  sinusoidal transformation.
In @emph{ICSLP98}, volume ?, pages ????--????, Sydney, Australia.,
  1998.

@item black96
A. Black and A. Hunt.
Generating @r{F}$_0$ contours from @r{ToBI} labels using linear
  regression.
In @emph{ICSLP96}, volume 3, pages 1385--1388, Philadelphia, PA.,
  1996.

@item black98b
A. Black, K. Lenzo, and V. Pagel.
Issues in building general letter to sound rules.
In @emph{Proc. ESCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis}, pages ???--???,
  Australia., 1998.

@item black97c
A. Black and P. Taylor.
Automatically clustering similar units for unit selection in speech
  synthesis.
In @emph{Eurospeech97}, volume 2, pages 601--604, Rhodes, Greece,
  1997.

@item black97a
A. W. Black.
Predicting the intonation of discourse segments from examples in
  dialogue speech.
In Y. Sagisaka, N. Campbell, and N. Higuchi, editors, @emph{Computing
  Prosody}, pages 117--128. Springer-Verlag, 1997.

@item campbell96
N. Campbell and A. Black.
Prosody and the selection of source units for concatenative
  synthesis.
In J. van Santen, R. Sproat, J. Olive, and J. Hirschberg, editors,
  @emph{Progress in speech synthesis}, pages 279--282. Springer Verlag, 1996.

@item campbell91
N. Campbell and S. Isard.
Segment durations in a syllable frame.
@emph{Journal of Phonetics}, 19(1):37--47, 1991.

@item conkie96
A. Conkie and S. Isard.
Optimal coupling of diphones.
In J. van Santen, R. Sproat, J. Olive, and J. Hirschberg, editors,
  @emph{Progress in speech synthesis}, pages 293--305. Springer Verlag, 1996.

@item donovan95
R. Donovan and P. Woodland.
Improvements in an @r{HMM}-based speech synthesiser.
In @emph{Eurospeech95}, volume 1, pages 573--576, Madrid, Spain, 1995.

@item dusterhoff97a
K. Dusterhoff and Black A.
Generating @r{F}$_0$ contours for speech synthesis using the tilt
  intonation theory.
In @emph{Proc. ESCA Workshop on Intonation}, Athens, Greece., 1997.

@item dutoit97
T. Dutoit.
@emph{An Introduction to Text-to-Speech Synthesis}.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.

@item dutoit93
T. Dutoit and H. Leich.
@r{MBR-PSOLA} : Text-to-speech synthesis based on an @r{MBE} re-synthesis
  of the segments database.
@emph{Speech Communication}, 13:435--440, 1993.

@item dutoit96
T. Dutoit, V. Pagel, N. Pierret, O. @r{v}an @r{d}er @r{V}reken, and F. Bataille.
The mbrola project: Towards a set of high-quality speech synthesizers
  free of use for non-commercial purposes.
In @emph{ICSLP96}, volume 3, pages 1393--1397, Philadelphia, PA.,
  1996.
http://tcts.fpms.ac.be/synthesis/mbrola.html.

@item hertz90
S. Hertz.
The delta programming language: an integrated approach to non-linear
  phonology, phonetics and speech synthesis.
In John Kingston and Mary E. Beckman, editors, @emph{Papers in
  Laboratory Phonology 1}. Cambridge University Press, 1990.

@item hirschberg90
J. Hirschberg.
Accent and discourse context: assigning pitch accent in synthetic
  speech.
In @emph{Proceedings of AAAI-90}, pages 952--957, 1990.

@item hirschberg94
J. Hirschberg and P. Prieto.
Training intonation phrase rules automatically for @r{E}nglish and
  @r{S}panish text-to-speech.
In @emph{Proc. ESCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis}, pages 159--162,
  Mohonk, NY., 1994.

@item huang97
X. Huang, A. Acero, H. Hon, Y. Ju, J Liu, S. Meredith, and M. Plumpe.
Recent improvements on microsoft's trainable text-to-speech
  synthesizer: Whistler.
In @emph{ICASSP-97}, volume II, pages 959--962, Munich, Germany, 1997.

@item hunt96
A. Hunt and A. Black.
Unit selection in a concatenative speech synthesis system using a
  large speech database.
In @emph{ICASSP-96}, volume 1, pages 373--376, Atlanta, Georgia, 1996.

@item hunt89
M. Hunt, Zwierynski D., and Carr R.
Issues in high quality @r{LPC} analysis and synthesis.
In @emph{Eurospeech89}, volume 2, pages 348--351, Paris, France, 1989.

@item isard86
S. Isard and D. Miller.
Diphone synthesis techniques.
In @emph{Proceedings of IEE International Conference on Speech
  Input/Output}, pages 77--82, 1986.

@item iwahashi93
N. Iwahashi, N. Kaiki, and Y. Sagisaka.
speech segment selection for concatenative synthesis based on
  spectral distortion minimization.
@emph{IEICE Transaction Fundamentals}, E76-A:1942--1948, 1993.

@item jilka96
M. Jilka.
Regelbasierte generierung nat@r{\"u}rlich klingender intonationsmuster
  des amerikanischen englisch (rule-based generation of naturally sounding
  intonation patterns of american english).
Master's thesis, University of Stuttgart, Institute of Natural
  Language Processing, 1996.

@item kain98
A. Kain and M. Macon.
Spectral voice conversion for text-to-speech synthesis.
In @emph{ICASSP-98}, volume 1, pages 285--288, Seattle, Washington,
  1998.

@item malfrere97
F. Malfrere and T. Dutoit.
High quality speech synthesis for phonetic speech segmentation.
In @emph{Eurospeech97}, pages 2631--2634, Rhodes, Greece, 1997.

@item moulines90
Eric. Moulines and F. Charpentier.
Pitch-synchronous waveform processing techniques for text-to-speech
  synthesis using diphones.
@emph{Speech Communication}, 9(5/6):453--467, 1990.

@item ostendorf95
M. Ostendorf, P. Price, and S. Shattuck-Hufnagel.
The @r{B}oston @r{U}niversity @r{R}adio @r{N}ews @r{C}orpus.
Technical Report ECS-95-001, Electrical, Computer and Systems
  Engineering Department, Boston University, Boston, MA, 1995.

@item pagel98
V. Pagel, K. Lenzo, and A. Black.
Letter to sound rules for accented lexicon compression.
In @emph{ICSLP98}, Sydney, Australia., 1998.

@item portele96
Thomas Portele, Florian H\"@r{o}fer, and Wolfgang Hess.
A mixed inventory structure for @r{G}erman concatenative synthesis.
In J.P. van Santen, R. Sproat, J. Olive, and J. Hirschberg, editors,
  @emph{Progress in Speech Synthesis}, pages 263--277. Springer, 1996.
Also as Verbmobil report 149.

@item ritchie92
G. Ritchie, G. Russell, A. Black, and S. Pulman.
@emph{Computational Morphology}.
MIT Press, Cambrdige, Mass., 1992.

@item roach93
P. Roach, G. Knowles, T. Varadi, and S. Arnfield.
Marsec: A machine-readable spoken english corpus.
@emph{Journal of the International Phonetic Association},
  23(1):47--53, 1993.

@item nuutalk92
Y. Sagisaka, N. Kaiki, N. Iwahashi, and K. Mimura.
@r{ATR} -- @r{$\nu$-TALK} speech synthesis system.
In @emph{Proceedings of ICSLP 92}, volume 1, pages 483--486, 1992.

@item silverman92
K. Silverman, M. Beckman, J. Pitrelli, M. Ostendorf, C. Wightman, P. Price,
  J. Pierrehumbert, and J. Hirschberg.
@r{ToBI}: a standard for labelling @r{E}nglish prosody.
In @emph{Proceedings of ICSLP92}, volume 2, pages 867--870, 1992.

@item sproat90
R. Sproat.
Stress assignment in complex nominals for @r{E}nglish text-to-speech.
In @emph{Proceedings of ESCA Workshop on Speech Synthesis}, pages
  129--133, Autrans, France, 1990.

@item sproat98
R. Sproat.
@emph{Multilingual Text-to-Speech Synthesis: The @r{B}ell @r{L}abs
  approach}.
Kluwer, 1998.

@item stella83
M. Stella.
Speech synthesis.
In F. Fallside and Woods W., editors, @emph{Computer Speech
  Processing}, pages 421--460. Prentice-Hall, 1983.

@item taylor99
P. Taylor.
The @r{T}ilt intonation model.
forthcoming, 1999.

@item taylor98a
P. Taylor and A. Black.
Assigning phrase breaks from part-of-speech sequences.
@emph{Computer Speech and Language}, 12:99--117, 1998.

@end table
