@chapter Resources

In this chapter we will try to list some of the important resources
available that you may need when building a voice in Festival.  This
list cannot be complete and comprehensive but we will to give references
to meta-resources as well as direct references to information code, data
that may be of use to you.

This document itself will be updated occasionally and it is worth
checking to ensure that you have the latest copy.  

Updates, new databases, new language support etc will happen
intermittently, new voices will be released which may help you 
develop your own new voices.
@example
@url{http://www.festvox.org}
@end example
has been set up as a resource center for voices in Festival offering
databases, examples and repository for voice distribution.  Checking
that site regularly is a good thing to do.

Specifically
@table @file
@item @url{http://www.festvox.org/examples/cmu_us_kal_diphone/}
Offers a complete example US English diphone databes as built using the
walkthough in @ref{US/UK English Walkthrough}.  The originally
recorded diphone databases is also available as is, at
@url{http://www.festvox.org/databases/cmu_us_kal_diphone/}.
@item @url{http://www.festvox.org/examples/cmu_time_awb_ldom/}
Offers a complete example limited domain synthesis database as 
build using the walkthrough in @ref{Limited domain synthesis}.
@end table
Other databases, lexicons etc will be installed on festvox.org as
they become available.

There is also a mailing-list @file{festvox-talk@@festvox.org} for
discussing aspects of building voices.  See
@url{http://www.festvox.org/maillist.html} for details of joining it
and the archive of messages already sent.  Also, while traffic is low,
feel free to mail the authors @file{awb@@cs.cmu.edu} or
@file{lenzo@@cs.cmu.edu} and we will try to help where we can.

@section Festival resources

The Festival home page @url{http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/festival.html}
It is updated regularly as new developments happen.

The Festival Speech Synthesis System code and the Edinburgh Speech
Tools library and related programs are available from
@example
@url{ftp://ftp.cstr.ed.ac.uk/pub/festival/}
@end example
or in the US at 
@example
@url{http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/festival/download.html}
@end example
Note that precompiled versions of the system are also available
from that site, though at time of writing only Linux binaries are
available.  

Festival comes with its own manual and html, postscript and
GNU info format.  It and a less comprehensive Speech Tools
manual are pre-built in @file{festdoc-1.4.1.tar.gz}.  The
manuals are also available on line at
@example
@url{hhttp://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/festival/manual-1.4.1/festival_toc.html}
@url{http://www.cstr.ed.ac.uk/projects/speech_tools/manual-1.2.0/speechtools_toc.html}
@end example
You will likely need to reference these manuals often.

It will also be useful to have access to other voices development
in Festival as seeing how others solve problems may make
things clearer.

In addition to Festival itself a number of other projects throughout
the world use Festival and have also released resources.  The
@samp{Related Projects} links give urls to other organizations
which you may find useful.

@cindex US English voices
@cindex Mexican Spanish
@cindex OGI
It is worth mentioning Oregon Graduate Institute here who have done a
lot of work with the system and release other voices for it (US English
and Mexican Spanish).  See @url{http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/tts/} for more
details.

@cindex MBROLA
A second project worth mention, is the MBROLA project @cite{dutoit96}
@url{http://tcts.fpms.ac.be/synthesis/mbrola.html}, they offer a
waveform synthesis technique @cite{dutoit93} and a number of diphone
database for lots of different languages.  MBROLA itself doesn't offer a
front end, just phone, duration and F0 target to waveform synthesis.
(However the do offer a full French TTS system too.)  Their diphone
databases complement Festival well and a number of projects use MBROLA
databases for their waveform synthesis and Festival as the front end.
If you lack resources to record and build diphone databases this is a
good place to check for existing diphone databases for languages.  Most
of their databases have some use/distribution restrictions but they
usually allow any non-commercial use.

@section General speech resources

The network is a vast resource of information but it is
not always easy to find what you are looking for.  

@cindex comp.speech
Indexes to speech related information are available.  The @file{comp.speech}
frequently asked questions maintain by Andrew Hunt, is an excellent
constantly updated list of information and resrouces available for
speech recognition and synthesis.  It is available in html format from
@example
Australia: @url{http://www.speech.su.oz.au/comp.speech/}
UK: @url{http://svr-www.eng.cam.ac.uk/comp.speech/}
Japan: @url{http://www.itl.atr.co.jp/comp.speech/}
USA: @url{http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/comp.speech/}
@end example

@cindex LDC
@cindex Linguistics Data Consortium
@cindex ELRA
@cindex Speech databases
@cindex OGI
@cindex Oregon Graduate Institute
The Linguistics Data Consortium (LDC), although expensive, offers many
speech resources including lexicons and databases suitable for
synthesis work.  There web page is @url{http://www.ldc.upenn.edu}.
A similar organization is the European Language Resources
Association @url{http://www.icp.grenet.fr/ELRA/home.html} which
is based in Europe.  Both these home pages have
links to other potential resources.

@example
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
to be added:
  recording and EGG information
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
@end example








